Information Bazaar: a Contextual Evaluation
Bernadette Kamleitner, Stephan Dickert
Vienna University of Economics and Business
Vienna, Austria
Marjan Falahrastegar, Hamed Haddadi
Queen Mary University of London
London, UK
ABSTRACT
The rise in the number of smart devices has created a large
ecosystem centred on users’ personal information and online
activities.
Numerous
smartphone
applications
and
social
networking
sites
harvest
and
catalogue
users’
personal
information, enabling brokers such as Google and Facebook to
provide a platform for advertisers to use this information for
targeted advertising. Despite the fact that the users of these
services are at the heart of this ecosystem, there has been little
effort in understanding individuals’ perception of the value of
their personal data in different contexts and situations.
In this work, we present the results of our large-scale, contextual
study over ten days that used smartphones to collect data on user
activities, location, and companionship, as well as the amount of
money that individuals attach to such information. Our results
indicate that people can be remarkably sensitive to situational
cues and also be prone to valuation biases. This study represents a
first step towards providing insights into the usefulness of a
marketplace for information, where users, or their agents, can
freely decide to auction off various pieces of their information
within established contexts.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 [SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES]: Economics
General Terms
Measurement, Economics, Human Factors,
Keywords
Privacy, Activity, Location, Price.
1. INTRODUCTION
Harvesting user information through smartphones is
economically attractive. This attraction is boosted by the large
number of sensors on these phones, most importantly location and
the bounty of applications offered by third party developers.
Although these facilities are very useful for consumers, there is a
high probability that consumers’ private information is accessed
without benefiting them. Smartphone applications are largely
funded by support of integrated advertising modules within them
[1]. Upon installation, a number of permissions are requested such
as access to contact lists, location and call logs. Once active, apps
pass this information on to advertising modules, independently
from app operation. There have recently been a number of
outcries over privacy issues such as access and storage of contact
lists without asking for explicit permission from the user. This
outcry meets with an increasing industry push towards profiling
mobile user’s behaviour. This information is of significant value
for different sectors, in particular targeted advertising [2,3] or
large-scale market research [4]. Yet from the users' point of view,
such information is considered private and sensitive. Various
studies across different fields such as economics, human
behaviour, law, and computer science have been recently
conducted to elaborate individuals' perceptions about privacy and
the value assigned to personal information. However, important
gaps in knowledge remain and the specific case of information
garnered via mobile apps has barely been the subject of empirical
scrutiny. More research aiming at understanding the value of
personal information when traded in a market place is urgently
needed. Currently, there is no encompassing and regulated trade
space for users' personal information in which users partake.
Profiling and personally identifying information is traded between
organisations, advertisers and, in many cases, spammers in an
unregulated manner. The first step to creating such a marketplace
(see [5] and [6]), is in understanding the users' perception of the
value of their personal information.
In our recent study1 we aimed to understand the type and quality
of information that people consider particularly valuable and
whether individuals are capable of pricing their information. We
used a mobile app to obtain real time evaluations of actual self-
reported user activity patterns; thus assessing the value of
information at different times of day, different places and in
different situations. In order to explore whether people are in fact
capable of coherently pricing this information we assessed
whether valuations were sensitive to biases caused by different
elicitation methods. Our app consisted of four different
experimental versions, eliciting valuations of information in
different ways (value to protect information, value to sell
information using open prices and scales). The use of different
value elicitation methods allowed us comparing the stability of
value. We are hence able to determine whether people, in general,
are able to consistently price their personal information. In this
paper, we present a first look at the outcomes of this study and
present the high level results obtained so far.
2. RELATED WORK
There have been a number of recent works on quantifying the
value of personal information [16, 17]. In this paper we will focus
on evaluating online and mobile phone data and location sharing
preference while trying to infer the contextual monetary
1 www.privacyvalue.org
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2491159.2491161
57
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
HotPlanet’13, August 16, 2013, Hong Kong, China.
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2177-8/13/08 ...$15.00.

evaluation ability of individuals. Our work is the first attempt at
trying to capture the contextual evaluation of users, using a
smartphone app study over duration of time, rather than relying on
surveys. Our work in this sense is similar to efforts in [15]. Due to
space limitations we do not represent all the related work on paper
surveys or web surveys. Empirical studies suggest that value of
personal information is not a constant and coherent figure and can
vary based on different factors such as context of information or
personal attitude toward a piece of information. Adams & Sasse
[7] address a model of user perceptions of privacy, which consists
of three factors: (1) data sensitivity (2) data receiver (3) data
usage. They claim that individuals’ decision about protecting their
information depends on whether they know who can access it and
how it will be used; in addition to how it is going to be interpreted
by the receiver. The value of information also depends on the
person itself. For example, Huberman et al. [8] show a certain
degree of inertia in individuals’ choice to sell information about
their undesirable traits. Overweight subjects demanded higher
prices than underweight or normal weight groups. Deciding how
to price personal information as any other decision-making under
uncertainty can be impacted by non-normative factors (such as
hyperbolic discounting). For example, Acquisti & Loewenstein
[9] pointed to the influence of the order of offers on the value that
individuals assign to their personal information and showed that
people are more sensitive to the purpose of the data collection,
rather than to the duration and quantity of data collected. Riederer
et al. [6] used a browser plugin to understand the way users
evaluate different types of personal information and their
perceptions with regard to exploitation of this information by
online service providers. Their results indicate that, in exchange
for personalized services, many users settle for low prices for their
personal information.
3. USER STUDY
One of the main contributions of the current study is its
immediacy. Existing research nearly exclusively asked for the
value of information that has either already been available for
some time (e.g. Facebook) or that will be available in the future
(e.g., all in one selling of location data). This temporal asymmetry
between generation of information and its sale may have
substantial effects on the value assigned and distort the actual
perceived value of information. Documented biases that are in line
with a mismatch between real time and delayed estimation include
hyperbolic discounting phenomena and forecasting errors.
Another important distinction between the current valuation and
other prior studies (in particular comprehensive studies on social
media users) concerns the usefulness of information for the
potential information provider. Studies on Facebook assessed the
value of Facebook profiles including all information that is stored
on the profile. This mainly includes user-generated content. User
generated content clearly goes beyond information about the user.
Users can and do “use” their content for their own purposes
whereas personal information that is simply traced via a device is
at best occasionally of use to the user, for example, activity data
used to monitor fitness or health.
We asked the participants to assign a monetary value to their
Personal Information (PI) using a mobile phone app. Previous
literature shows that such self-generated prices may be subject to
biases. For example, people may construct values by anchoring on
other, possibly irrelevant cues (anchoring effect [10]). In this
sense any numbers presented when asking for a value may
influence the value estimate given. Another potential bias for
value estimates stems from different evaluation perspectives.
Ambiguity may arise as to whether it is a minimum value to keep
information safe or a maximum value to sell this information.
Rational actors should value information equally regardless of
how they are asked for it. However, in line with psychological
insights formalised in Prospect Theory [11], valuations are
affected by their context. Changes that are framed as losses are
weighted more heavily than changes framed as gains. Inspired
from this theory, Thaler hypothesised that a person requires higher
compensation to give up a product (willingness to accept, WTA)
she would be willing to pay (WTP) to gain the same good. This is
called the endowment effect [11] and it complicates the
assessment of value. We dealt with this challenge by using
different ways of assessing value.
One of the main questions in the mobile app survey asked
participants to provide a monetary value for their current
information, including their location, company and activity. If
participants had no clear notion of how to derive such a value,
estimates should be extraordinarily prone to biases such as
anchoring and endowment effects. We hence observed the extent
of these biases to get an idea of whether people are capable of
consistently pricing their real-time in situ information. This was
achieved by experimentally varying the way the valuation
question was posed. Experimental versions can be logically
divided into 2 main conditions: (1) WTP (What is the minimum
amount that you would be willing to pay to restrict others from
accessing this information?) and (2) WTA (What is the minimum
amount that somebody would have to pay you to get access to this
information?). Changing the way the answers were provided
systematically varied WTA assessments. In the open Price
condition, participants could write down any price in an open text
field. In the £5 price condition participants could move a slider on
a scale between £0 to £5, to indicate their desired price for that
piece of information. Underneath this scale, there was an open
text field in which participants could indicate any other price. In
the £10 condition the procedure was analogous to the £5 condition
except that the scale went from £0 to £10. Overall this yielded
four experimental conditions to which participants were randomly
assigned.
Our mobile application was designed to automatically show a
pop-up message on the mobile screen and invite mobile holders to
answer the questionnaire. The message would pop up twice per
day and participants were supposed to answer it for ten days. This
data was then collected and stored anonymously according to
QMUL ethics approval.
One hundred and one participants provided a price for their
information at least once. Participants’ age ranged between 18 and
64 with an average age of 31 years. Approximately 80% of
participants were under or equal to 35 years old. Only 18% of
participants were female. Of the participants, 67% had an income
between 20k-30k or less. The majority of participants were full-
time workers or students, respectively, 56% and 32%.
With regard to the amount of apps installed, self-reports indicate
that the majority of participants (53%) have between 10-40
applications on their phone. Over 50% of participants consider
themselves as mid to highly privacy-concerned. The developed
application was compatible with all Android devices but no other
mobile operating system, which might have biased the sample
somewhat. 95% of participants were using smartphones for the
study.
58

Figure 1: Price categories by condition
4. PERCEIVED VALUE OF
INFORMATION
Overall, 1,425 valuations were obtained (an average 7.8 per
participant). Here we present a few selected results from the
experiment. In 79.4% of cases the price demanded did not exceed
£10. In 20.4% of cases a value of zero was indicated.
To get a better idea of how to interpret the established
differences we established different categories of valuations,
similar to Bauer, Korunovska, and Spiekerman [12]: (a) instances
in which information was considered free (20.42%), (b) instances
in which a “low” price of a maximum of 10 GBP was demanded
(59.02%); this border was chosen because it functioned as the
highest possible price in the sliding scale conditions and also acts
as an important psychological price marker, (c) instances in which
a higher price of up to 500 GBP was demanded; we consider
information in these cases as particularly valuable (17.33%) and
(d) instances in which even higher prices (>500 GBP) were
interpreted as indicating a general unwillingness to part with the
information (3.23%).
We analysed whether the four experimental conditions yielded
differences in terms of the prevalence of these valuation
categories. A chi square test indicates that different ways of
eliciting values indeed led to different responses, Chi² (df=9) =
136.40, p < .001, but an uncertainty coefficient of .04 indicates
that the influence of the manipulation on the valuation categories
is rather weak. Figure 1 shows that the following differences seem
to emerge. First, participants who were asked how much they
would be willing to pay in order to keep their information (WTP)
were significantly more likely to treat information as free (around
28% of cases) than those asked how much money they demanded
(WTA; free in around 17% of cases). This is in support of an
endowment effect.
A comparison of the WTP conditions in which participants had
different sliding scales gives first insights into whether participant
valuations were subject to anchor effects. In line with anchor
effects, participants who were provided with a sliding scale of up
to 5 GBP were more likely to demand prices of up to 10 GBP than
all other groups. Participants who were provided with a sliding
scale of up to 10 GBP were most likely to indicate unwillingness
to sell by demanding prices in excess of 500 GBP.
Overall, even though there are variations in answer patterns that
conform to endowment and anchor effects, it is remarkable how
similar these patterns are in many other respects. Each
experimental condition deviated from the other conditions with
respect to one answer category only. Regardless of answer format
participants across all 3 willingness to accept conditions were
equally likely to give information for free and unless a
comparably low reference price was provided a constant 55% of
participants demanded “low or reasonable” prices.
In a next step, we analyzed whether valuations differed across
demographic characteristics. There was a difference across gender
with women being more likely to either provide information for
free or to not sell it (see Figure 2)
Figure 2: Price across genders
We also identified significant age differences with older people
being less likely to provide information for free (see Figure 3).
Figure 3: Price categories by age
In a next step, we aimed to understand how the concrete situation
a person is in influences the value of situational information. First
59

we looked at the value of the location a person is in. We used chi²
test to compare the prevalence of different valuation categories
across 3 generic locations. The test proved marginally significant
revealing that people who are outdoors are most likely to provide
information for free.
We conducted the same analyses for activity categories but
surprisingly found no significant difference in price distributions
across broad activity categories, suggesting that people demand
the same type of price regardless of what activity they are
engaged in. The same holds for the type of company people are in.
This is surprising but may be due to the somewhat rough
categorizations used for these analyses and it may hide more
complex situational patterns.
Each data entry consists of the description of a complete situation:
current detailed activity category (n = 36), location category
(n=12) and company (n = 6). Naturally these pieces of
information are often related, and form activity patterns, such as
attending meetings at the work place with colleagues. To capture
this holistic nature of a situation and to become capable of dealing
with a dataset in which many individual situation cells contained
zero observations we resorted to establishing distinct situation
profiles. A two-step cluster analysis was used to condense
information about detailed activities, locations and companions
into 5 homogenous situation profiles with interpretable clusters (n
between 170 and 311). Table 1 describes the respective clusters
by documenting cluster name and most frequent locations,
activities and companions per cluster.
Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3 Cluster 4 Cluster 5
Name
Family
Matters
Me Time Being Out
and About
Being
Social
Being at
Work
Location
home
home
public
space
no clear
place
work place
Activity eat/drink watch TV/
read
get
somewhere
visting,
study, eat
work
Company family
alone
alone
friends
alone,
colleagues
Size
N = 233
N = 311
N = 170
N = 266
N = 303
Table 1. Clusters of situations
In order to understand whether and how the situation and the
method of eliciting valuations influences the price of information,
we conducted an analysis of variance on the price demanded.
Note that we first reduced skewness by capping (at 100 GBP; less
than 5% of the data) and log-transforming participants’
valuations. By simultaneously using situation and elicitation
method as predictors we are able to determine whether there are
situations in which participants are particularly sensitive to anchor
effects and endowment effects respectively, in other words
whether there are situations in which participants are less sure
about the actual price and hence more sensitive to the elicitation
method. To control for potential income differences and possible
learning effects we included income and the number of prior
valuations given as covariates. The resulting 4 (elicitation
method) x 5 (situation) ANOVA yielded a main effect of the type
of elicitation method used qualified by a significant interaction
between situation and elicitation method. Surprisingly, the
situation itself had low significant effect on price estimates
received. In addition, income emerged as a significant covariate
whereas the number of prior evaluations given did not.
Figure 5 illustrates the interaction in detail. To simplify visual
interpretation it shows median prices demanded rather than mean
log prices. Follow up ANOVAs per situational contrast in
combination with simple contrasts provide statistical insights into
the interpretation of the depicted interactions. We discuss
variations across elicitation methods for each situation in turn.
When engaged in “family matters (Cluster 1)” participants seem
to be somewhat receptive to anchoring effects. Participants in the
WTA10 condition asked for significantly more money than
participants in the WTA open price condition, however, no
anchoring effect was observed in the WTA5 condition in which
valuations were no different from the WTA open price condition.
The difference between WTA open price and WTP open price
approached significance indicating a small endowment effect.
When being “home and alone (Cluster2)” participants also seem
to be prone to anchoring effects. Participants in the WTA10
condition asked for significantly more money than participants in
the WTA open price condition. A downward anchor was also
observed with participants in the WTA5 condition asking for less
money than participants in the WTA open price condition. In
addition there was a significant difference between WTA open
price and WTP open price indicating the existence of an
endowment effect.
When being “out and about (Cluster 3)” participants only seem to
be prone to a downward anchoring effect. While there is no
difference between participants in the WTA10 and WTA open
price conditions, participants in the WTA5 condition asked for
less money than participants in the WTA open price condition. In
addition there was a significant difference between WTA open
price and WTP open price indicating the existence of an
endowment effect.
When engaged in social activities with friends (Cluster 4),
participants do not seem prone to anchoring effects at all. There
was neither a difference between participants in the WTA10 and
WTA open price conditions, nor between participants in the
WTA5 condition and the WTA open price condition. However,
the difference between WTA open price and WTP open price
approached significance indicating the existence of a small
endowment effect.
When being “at work (Cluster 5)” participants only seem to be
prone to a downward anchoring effect. While there is no
difference between participants in the WTA10 and WTA open
Figure 4: Price categories by location
60

price conditions, participants in the WTA5 condition asked for
less money than participants in the WTA open price condition. In
addition there was a significant difference between WTA open
price and WTP open price, indicating the existence of an
endowment effect.
Figure 5: Median user pricing in £ in different situations
To sum up results indicate that different situations do not seem to
come at different prices. However, how consistently the same type
of situation is priced when there are bias-inducing cues present
varies across situations. In general value estimates for in situ
information are no more (if at all less) prone to anchoring and
endowment biases than other objects. In fact in some situations
people do not seem to exhibit commonly observed biases at all.
When being engaged with others in a social situation, people’s
valuations overcome otherwise pervasive anchoring effects and
even the usually robust endowment effect only approaches
significance. It could be that this reflects that a truly shared
situation cannot be at the extreme ends of the valuation spectrum
but further qualitative or experimental analyses would be
necessary for being able to actually interpret these findings
clearly. Nonetheless, coming back to our main point of interest:
Taken together people seem able to attach a price to their in situ
information, although we can not treat this as willingness to sell
their information.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have presented a first look at selected aggregate
results of a large, multi-staged experiment in or- der to determine
the contextual value of personal information from users’
perspective. In contrast with findings in [13], our survey results
show that users do attach value to their information and many of
them are prepared to sell them, with consistent awareness of the
range of prices that this information could be realistically traded
for. This is the first stage in enabling the creation of a market
place for personal data, demanding user ownership over data, and
clarification of the value of free services. It should also be noted,
however, that although the price range was reasonable for most
observations, we also found evidence for some of the more typical
biasing effects in valuations (including anchoring and the
endowment effect). Interestingly, some situations seem to be more
prone to these biases than others. Our analyses enable privacy-
advocates, service providers and policy makers to better
understand individuals’ perception of the personal data ecosystem
and reach mutually benefiting agreements accordingly. Finally,
our paper ties in neatly with current endeavors to communicate
the importance of consumer protection [14].
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the EPSRC Pump-Priming grant
number EP/J501360/1 at Queen Mary University of London. The
authors wish to thank participants in the app trials and test studies.
We also acknowledge constructive comments from the reviewers..
7. REFERENCES
[1] Ilias Leontiadis, Christos Efstratiou, Marco Picone, Cecilia
Mascolo, "Don't kill my ads! Balancing Privacy in an Ad-
Supported Mobile Application Market " , In Proceedings of
13th ACM Sigmobile Workshop on Mobile Computing
Systems and Applications (HotMobile 2012). San Diego, CA,
USA. February 2012.
[2] Hamed Haddadi, Pan Hui, Ian Brown "MobiAd: Private and
Scalable Mobile Advertising", in The 5th ACM International
Workshop on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture
(MobiArch2010), Chicago, Illinois, USA, September 2010.
[3] Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez, Jay Shah, Alessandro Finamore,
Yan Grunenberger, Konstantina Papagiannaki, Hamed
Haddadi, Jon Crowcroft, “Breaking for Commercials:
Characterizing Mobile Advertising”, in ACM SIGCOMM
Internet Measurement Conference, November 2012.
[4] Hamed Haddadi, Richard Mortier, Steven Hand, Ian Brown,
Eiko Yoneki, Derek McAuley and Jon Crowcroft: “Privacy
Analytics”. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review, April 2012.
[5] Gkatzelis, Vasilis, Aperjis, Christina and Huberman,
Bernardo A., Pricing Private Data (September 14, 2012).
[6] C. Riederer, V. Erramilli, A. Chaintreau, B. Krishnamurthy,
P. Rodriguez, For Sale: Your Data, By: You, ACM Hotnets
2011.
[7] A. Adams and M. A. Sasse. Privacy in Multimedia
Communications: Protecting Users, Not Just Data. 2001.
[8] B. Huberman, E. Adar, and L. Fine. Valuating privacy.
Security Privacy, IEEE, 3(5), Sept.-Oct. 2005.
[9] A. Acquisti, L. John, and G. Loewenstein. What is Privacy
worth? In Proceedings of the Twenty First Workshop on
Information Systems and Economics (WISE), Dec. 2009.
[10] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. In Science, volume 185, pages 1124-
1131. 1974.
[11] D. Kahneman and A. Tversky. Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision under Risk. In Econometrica,, volume
47, pages 263–291. 1979.
[12] C. Bauer, J. Korunovska, and S. Spiekermann. On the value
of information; What Facebook users are willing to pay. In
ECIS 2012 Proceedings. Paper 197.
[13] J. Urban, C. Hoofnagle, S. Li, Mobile phones and privacy. In
BCLT Research Paper Series; UC Berkeley Public Law
Research Paper No. 2103405, 2012.
61

[14] Federal Trade Commisions (2012). Protecting consumer
privacy in an era of rapid change: Recommendations for
businesses
and
policy
makers.
Retrieved
from
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/03/120326privacyreport.pdf.
[15] Fehmi
Ben
Abdesslem
and
Tristan
Henderson.
Understanding mobile social behaviour using smartphones.
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Observing the Mobile
User Experience, Reykjavik, Iceland, October 2010.
[16] Sasank Reddy, Deborah Estrin, Mark Hansen, and Mani
Srivastava. Examining micro-payments for participatory
sensing data collections. Ubicomp '10, 2010.
[17] George Danezis, Stephen Lewis, Ross Anderson, How Much
is Location Privacy Worth? WEIS 2005
62

